---
layout: post
title: webfonts.fonts.com @font-face support in IE9 (updated)
created: 1300274713
---
<p>Discovered an oddity of IE9's Webfont support today, on our site for <a href="http://kingsfund.org.uk" target="_blank">The Kings Fund</a>.</p><p>The problem surrounds the principal of Embedding Permissions set in all font files by their makers, which determines whether a font is allowed to be embedded on third party systems or not. If you're using @font-face declarations to serve up font files from your own server, you'll need to configure Apache/et al to serve up the font files with the <code>Access-Control-Allow-Origin "*"</code> header, which allows embedding on third party systems - or in other words, the browser on which your website is being viewed.</p><p><a href="http://stackoverflow.com/questions/5065362/ie9-blocks-download-of-cross-origin-web-font" target="_blank">Stackoverflow</a> and <a href="http://html5boilerplate.com/" target="_blank">HTML5Boilerplate </a>to the partial rescue. They provided explanation and solutions which work fine if you're serving your own font files, but not if you're using a third party providers for fonts which aren't freely distributed, such as<a href="http://webfonts.fonts.com" target="_blank"> webfonts.fonts.com</a>.</p><p>In this particular case, we were using fonts from wefonts.fonts.com and had installed the fonts we'd purchased using their non-js, css-based method which amounts to nothing more than a <code>&lt;link rel="stylesheet"&gt;</code> pointing to their server, which is preferable to the with-js version for obvious reasons. However it seems IE9 didn't like this despite the correct headers having been set by fonts.com.</p><p>The error in the IE9 console is:</p><p><code>CSS3114: @font-face failed OpenType embedding permission check. Permission must be Installable. </code></p><p>Nothing I did seemed to remedy this, so I resorted to the with-js installation method, which works fine.</p><p>If anyone knows what the problem is here and whether I can fix it, any input appreciated.</p><h2>Update</h2><p>fonts.com got in contact and explained what to do. They had made recent changes to their serving methods and It appears I needed to force a flush of the cached stylesheets they were serving. This was done simply by logging into my account, saving my changes without actually doing anything (as if I'd made a change to the selectors or fonts I was using) then refreshing the page I was using it on.</p><p>The webfont team there seems to be on the ball, particularly as they managed to find this relatively obscure blog! Cheers, Monotype.</p>
