---
layout: post
title: A hosting conundrum
created: 1318451302
---
<p>Its time to upgrade my hosting but the options are many and confusing. I currently have a single-core Pentium 4 dedicated server which hosts everything. I can either split up the services I currently host myself and hand them off to third parties, or keep them all together. Then there's the question of Virtual or Dedicated.</p><p>My current server hosts several small sites, several private SVN repos and one large site responsible for using most of the server's resources. None of it is backed up, which is a Big Deal.</p><p>Moving the large site to its own host could cost as much as the entire current server. Alone it requires 2GB ram, 700GB of bandwidth a month and constant MySQL processes. I'd still have to find hosting for all the other sites and services too.</p><p>SVN repos could be moved to a third party host. The SVN solution is probably my single biggest need as none of the other sites would be running if their source code was lost.</p><p>That still leaves the websites. Do I host them together or separately? The latter would be costly but it would be more flexible if any one (or group) of those sites required more resources. Similarly a Dedicated server gives rise to flexibility issues; a Virtual solution would mean I could throw in RAM, processors and disk space whenever necessary, but then a Dedicated server would have more burstable, stable resources to allocate quicker, even if they're limited and inflexible.</p><p>After all that, I still need a backup solution capable of storing 50GB+.</p><p>I like the idea of a Virtual, cloud solution. Being able to keep my websites' source on a cloud device and change the OS and hardware around it as I see fit is definitely appealing. However the cost of such a solution is no less than I'm paying at the moment and I'd still not have a backup solution. My paranoia of losing data is growing and I feel backup or movable storage is more important than the speed of a larger but Dedicated machine.</p><p>Balancing cost and resource demand is complex</p>
