---
layout: default
title: Uploading files, the 500lb gorilla in the corner of the HTML room.
created: 1319655418
---
<p>Uploading files online has always been an issue, but developers and users have got by for years with some quite basic, insufficient solutions. Every 6 months or so I encounter a new situation where a solution is needed and again I have to scour the web to see what new libraries have been created since the last time.&nbsp;I'm not talking about uploading your website, or deploying a codebase, i'm talking about uploading a file to an existing site - perhaps an image to and image host or a video to youtube.</p><p>The problem is one of UX. The "file" type of input field in HTML has always been annoyingly unhelpful. You can choose the file ok and submitting the form will certainly upload it, but when the file is over a few kb, you have to wait. On large files such as videos this wait can be literally hours, depending on your internet connection. While the file is uploading the browser stalls. No links can be clicked or pages loaded or refreshed. Rightly, &nbsp;users get impatient, cancel their uploads, question whether its "crashed again" etc.</p><p>The solution is incredibly simple: providing the user with feedback. A progress bar is all anyone needs. Has it crashed? Nope the bar is still moving. How long is left? Oh that long, I'll go make a coffee. You can still close the window cancelling the upload if you want, but you're given all the information with which to make a decision.</p><p>The problem is that as a developer there are now a plethora of software solutions to "the upload problem" and in some cases the progress bar isn't even included. Some upload libraries have become preoccupied with queuing sequential uploads - even at the sacrifice of progress bars. What's the point in queuing if the user has no idea how long the queue will take? Its crazy!</p><p>I believe the requirements of a solution are simply that it should:</p><ol><li>provide progress indicators to the user for every file</li><li>require no alterations on the server-side to provide the progress indicators</li><li>not tie up the server threads unnecessarily during upload</li></ol>
