---
layout: default
title: Google Analytics data export
created: 1303854592
---
<p>It recently occurred to me that analytics, webstats, whatever you want to call them, are still a relatively static system. The data gathered is intended to feed back into the site itself and improve it, however the act of improvement is only linked manually and retrospectively to the statistics themselves. There is rarely any <em>dynamic</em> feedback into the site based on those stats.</p><p>Much of the time this manual approach is necessary because stats often require some analysis, but some of the simpler stats such as the basic dril-down of top content require little translation and represent simple facts. If your stats tells you the top <em>n</em>&nbsp;pages in any given section for a particular period, theres very little else that those stats say. They say "Over that period, these were what users most frequently viewed".&nbsp;</p><p>The question is: does your site display those <em>n</em>&nbsp;pages in a way that represents their popularity? If those pages are what people want, why not priortise them?</p><p>Its obviously important to avoid a positive feedback loop, but bear in mind that the content of most websites appeals to different people in different ways. If the top content titles don't appeal to your visitors, its likely they just won't visit them. Its all down to how you frame it. If you title it "Must-see articles" then users may worry they're missing something and may visit it regardless whether the title is of interest. If you title it "Popular articles" then it only indicates what <em>most</em> people were after so would have less of a pressuring effect. Better yet if you title it "Popular articles this week" it implies that what is popular now may not appeal, but</p>
